DH Publication #3: Interactive Site and Critical Reflection on Tool Use
This last part of the project has students looking at the “vertical” parts of the pandemic, rather than just the “horizontal.” By focusing on the vertical, one can tell the basic history, but then also explain the underlying societal structures which lead to those events occurring, and better understand the viewpoints of those protesting and enacting change in response to history. This year has highlighted the weaknesses of the American healthcare system, the limitations of our supply chain and capitalism, as well as the many racial injustices committed by law enforcement and “vigilantes”. Through the process outlined by this class (gone into further detail within the “Process Narrative” page), students were given an academic space to contextualize there experiences this year, and better understand the spaces we inhabit, historical to bureaucratic.


Many of us have been completing work from Lincoln, Nebraska, though there are some students completing work from other parts of the state, or even other parts of the country. Despite this, we have all been able to interact with one another online, and critique each other’s website design. I have cleaned up parts of my website from the recommendations of my fellow student, Hope McCaffey, in order to improve reading experience.


Dev. Report #7: Acknowledging the history of the location of your DH work
As immigrants to the United States, no matter our ancestors’ original intentions for coming here, we reside on stolen land. I grew up on lands stolen from the Menominee, Očhéthi Šakówiŋ, Peoria, Kickapoo, and Potawatomi, but I did not learn this until I was an adult. There are a wide range of dates that encompass the earliest possible arrival of the indigenous people to the Great Plains that range from 1,150 years to 38,000 years ago (Deloria 2003). The area of North America which is now the state of Nebraska overlies the traditional lands of approximately 11 tribes, according to Native Land Digital (2020). Nebraska and the Great Plains represent an area of the continent which has cyclical wet and dry seasons. Between 11,550 and 11,000 B.C.E., the Great Plains entered a dry period with an increased range of temperature, resulting in declining surface water availability and extinction of megafauna (early Holocene period) (Deloria 2003). This set the stage for bison to become the new dominant creature on the landscape, becoming the main food source of most Plains peoples. Often following the bison herds, many groups were primarily nomadic until about 2000 to 1000 years before present (Deloria 2003; Wishart 2019). 


The Spanish were the first Europeans to enter the Great Plains, looking for cities of gold in the “sea of grass.” (Allen 1993) Francisco Vásquez de Coronado was sent by Spain in the 1540s to explore north of Mexico for said cities, and brought horses with him, fundamentally changing the geography of the Great Plains. Europeans also brought guns and disease to the region, developing healthy trade lines and unhealthy pandemics (Deloria 2003). As the United States began encroaching westward, the U.S. Government needed a strategy to steal native lands for white settlers. Indian territory was created as a concept to prevent Americans from going too far west and to “contain” both them and indigenous people, and to later facilitate methods of cultural genocide (Wishart 2019). The U.S. Government wrote up land cession treaties for tribes to sign and move to the ever shrinking Indian territory out west, and on their new reservations, tribes were expected to live peacefully with traditional enemies and assimilate to western ways of life (Deloria 2003). 


Today, only the Ioway, Santee Sioux, Omaha, Sac and Fox, Winnebago, and Ponca tribes have reservation lands within Nebraska, minute laughable fractions of what represented their original territories. UNL sits on lands that were appropriated through stipulations of the 1862 Morrill Act, which allocated Nebraska 90,000 acres of land to expand working-class access to higher education (Land-Grant Connects 2020). Of the U.S. lands for Land-Grant Universities that were taken from indigenous people, 73% came from ratified treaties, 23% from unratified treaties, and the remaining 4% from forced seizure (High Country News 2020). UNL specifically sits on land ceded by treaty by the Otoe-Missouria tribe in 1833 and 1854, and the tribe was later forced out of Nebraska into Oklahoma’s Indian Territory in 1881. It is important to know the history of the land we live on, as becoming educated and aware of our position in the world allows us to undermine the dominant colonial paradigm and help take down systems of white supremacy.


DH Dev. Report #8: Acknowledging the contemporary contexts of your DH work
It’s difficult to be positive about the fight for equal rights in America when any gains are only made through intense violence and collective trauma. After Trump’s inauguration, I went to the St. Paul Women’s march protest, which like Lincoln’s march, also featured Black Lives Matter protests. Black Lives Matter (“BLM”) was originally created by Alicia Garza, Patrisse Cullors, and Opal Tometi in response to the murder of Trayvon Martin by George Zimmerman in 2013 (Black Lives Matter 2020). As an organization, BLM is “an ideological and political intervention” that affirms Black folk’s dignity, contributions to world society, resilience, and basic humanity in the face of systematic racism. While organizers were developing the #BlackLivesMatter movement through 2013 and 2014, the killing of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri by Darren Wilson further ignited the movement and launched it into mainstream media. By the end of 2014, the movement was inspiring protests across the country, including the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
The first mention of “Black Lives Matter” on UNL’s website was on November 17, 2015, about “Students plan ‘Black Lives Matter’ event.” The event was held two days later on November 19, inspired by recent protests about racism at the University of Missouri and Yale University (Nebraska Today 2015). Chancellors and vice chancellors Harvey Perlman, Ronnie Green and Juan Franco even released a statement saying “Black lives do matter” (Fedderson 2015), and since the recent murder of George Floyd in May of this year, the University has started a “UNL journey for Anti-Racism and Racial Equity” (Green 2020). Like many academic institutions, many of these promises seem empty, especially when UNL refused to expel violent white supremecist Dan Kleve on the basis of first amendment rights between these two statements (Boeshen and Anderson 2018).
Of course, the cities of Lincoln and Omaha exist in a liberal bubble compared to the rest of the state, but still have their share of violence. Both of the cities were marked by violence this summer, with peaceful protesters experiencing unnecessary force and brutality from law enforcement after breaking curfews. I’m ashamed to say that I didn’t attend the Lincoln protests in July out of fear of injury exacerbated by my chronic illness, but it’s difficult to hear and read the news about people being hunted down like animals in the streets for exercising their right to protest. When protestor Leo Celis was kneeling with his hands up in a group of protestors, police intentionally shot him with rubber bullets, one tearing “through Celis’ right cheek, shattering the bone underneath and blinding him in his right eye,” and those who attempting to help take Celis to medical help were shot as well (Dunker 2020).In Omaha, law enforcement forced protestors into enclosed spaces and arrested them for failure to disperse, unlawful assembly, and/or suspicion of evading arrest, and shot them with pepper balls (against manufacturer instructions) at close or point blank range (Dvorak, Bell, and Mastre 2020). Looking past this summer, there aren’t many stories from Nebraska or Lincoln concerning Black Lives Matter, possibly meaning that there haven’t been many events other than campus ones or the women’s marches from 2016 and ‘17.
It seems like any sort of racial injustice that happens in America under this presidency is either deflected or castigated. No matter what the result of the presidential election is, I just hope that there is positive change against police brutality within our many levels of government. I was able to march for black lives and women’s rights in Minnesota three years ago with no fear of retribution, and yet today, even as a white woman, I’m afraid of protesting for equal rights in fear of severe bodily harm. Even with my white privilege in America to walk around the world without societal disadvantages pinned to me from my birth, where is this country heading if it’s citizen’s cannot complete their democratic duty to voice their demands?


Cite page (MLA): Dowden, Carissa L.. “DH Publication #3: Interactive Site and Critical Reflection on Tool Use.” Coronavirus? In My Nebraska?, 2020, https://cdowden3.wordpress.com/dh-publication-3-interactive-site-and-critical-reflection-on-tool-use/.


Terms of use: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International